Title: Prevention of radial artery occlusion—Patent hemostasis evaluation trial (PROPHET study): A randomized comparison of traditional versus patency documented hemostasis after transradial catheterization

Source: openalex
Authors: Samir Pancholy, John Coppola, Tejas Patel, Marie Roke‐Thomas
Year: 2008
URL: https://doi.org/10.1002/ccd.21639

Abstract:
Abstract Objective: The objective of this study was to evaluate the efficacy of hemostasis with patency in avoiding radial artery occlusion after transradial catheterization. Background: Radial artery occlusion is an infrequent but discouraging complication of transradial access. It is related to factors such as sheath to artery ratio and is less common in patients receiving heparin. Despite being clinically silent in most cases, it limits future transradial access. Patients and Methods: Four hundred thirty‐six consecutive patients undergoing transradial catheterization were prospectively enrolled in the study. Two hundred nineteen patients were randomized to group I, and underwent conventional pressure application for hemostasis. Two hundred seventeen patients were randomized to group II and underwent pressure application confirming radial artery patency using Barbeau's test. Radial artery patency was studied at 24 hr and 30 days using Barbeau's test. Results: Thirty‐eight patients had evidence of radial artery occlusion at 24 hr. Twenty patients had persistent evidence of radial artery occlusion at 1 month. Group II, with documented patency during hemostatic compression, had a statistically and clinically lower incidence of radial artery occlusion (59% decrease at 24 hr and 75% decrease at 30 days, P &lt; 0.05), compared with patients in group I. Low body weight patients were at significantly higher risk of radial artery occlusion. No procedural variables were found to be associated with radial artery occlusion. Conclusion: Patent hemostasis is highly effective in reducing radial artery occlusion after radial access and guided compression should be performed to maintain radial artery patency at the time of hemostasis, to prevent future radial artery occlusion. © 2008 Wiley‐Liss, Inc.
